(upbeat music)
- Well, welcome to the Get Fit With Jodel podcast.
I am as usual Jodel and you know what?
Dr. Raymond Pete is back on the podcast.
He's with me again and he needs no introduction
for most of you that follow my podcast.
We are some repeat lovers here.
So, but if you do wanna learn about Dr. Pete
and you're new to the podcast,
I invite you to check out his amazingly informational,
chock full of information website that raypeet.com
that's R-A-Y-P-E-A-T.com.
And we're gonna dive right in
because I wanna thank all of you
who submitted questions for Dr. Pete.
I think both he and I really enjoy answering
these questions and I love hearing his input on them.
So we are gonna jump right in.
Dr. Pete, welcome to the podcast.
- Thanks.
- Yeah, so I'm gonna start with my own question
that I have for you that I've been really curious
to know about.
I kind of put mine at the top of the list here.
But what are your thoughts on Chinese medicine
and something that I'm learning about called liver heat?
Now I'm not trained in Chinese medicine,
but I love learning Ayurveda and Chinese medicine
and applying it to my clientele and to myself.
And I was wondering your thoughts
on how to achieve good liver balance.
And if you feel that liver heat or liver stagnation
is actually an issue in a lot of people.
- Yeah, the Chinese over thousands of years
accumulated lots of good knowledge.
But the idea of Chinese traditional medicine
isn't a monolithic thing.
It varies by regions, for example.
So there are many traditional Chinese medicines.
And I think many of them are somewhat useless
or maybe even harmful.
But they do have probably, in total,
there's probably more useful medication available
in Chinese medicine than in American pharmaceutical
or in medicine, just because it's such a vast field
of knowledge.
But it's based on basically natural substances
and a lot of the knowledge is metaphoric.
Like when I was in Mexico, I learned that the plans
that were, for example, something that was prescribed
for anemia in different areas.
It happened that when you cooked up the leaves
or twigs or whatever, they were plants
that produced a bright red solution,
even though they were hugely different chemicals.
It was the connection between the redness of the herb
and the perceived lack of redness of the blood
of an anemic person.
So it wasn't scientific at all.
And if it happened to work, it was really just accidental.
And so those things, if you have hundreds
of people doing that, sometimes you'll hit on a drug
that works and that'll be preserved.
So it'll be something that started as a metaphor,
but turned out to have an empirical value.
- And as far as like the liver heat,
when in Chinese medicine, they talk about liver heat
is like liver inflammation or liver stagnation.
What say you about that?
- The gut and the liver are really our basic
deepest interaction with the world
of chemistry and nutrition.
It happens that the liver is necessarily involved
in all of our chemical reactions.
And you can say that fixing the liver
is going to improve every condition.
But the way they go about fixing the liver
is again, sometimes very metaphorical
and sometimes unscientific.
But very often if you attend to the liver,
you're very often going to get things right.
- For sure.
What's one of your top tips for if somebody knows
they have liver inflammation
or some sort of liver issue going on,
what would you say would be the first line
of defense for them?
- Laxatives and anti-inflammatory substances
because irritation of the bowel necessarily
produces irritation of the liver.
The bowel is constantly either protecting the liver
from toxins or letting them through into the liver.
So if your intestine is inflamed and not working very well,
it's going to hurt your liver.
So laxatives and anti-inflammatories
are the first defense of the liver.
- Okay, good to know.
Now, one other question I had was there's a lot out there
on mono diets where somebody's just going to use one food
or substance to cleanse the body.
And I've recently come across one
that I think you might approve of.
Since you are a big fan of milk,
there's something coming out in the biotoxic illness
community called a milk cleanse,
where this is a mono diet
where somebody would only drink milk for eight days.
What are your thoughts on that?
What do you think about that?
- Sometimes it's extended to a month.
- Okay.
- And it can be very powerful
because the milk contains antibiotic ingredients
and multiple anti-inflammatory sedative,
as well as nutritional substances.
And really the only thing it lacks to live on for a year
is iron, you're an adult living on pure milk
for more than a year.
So, it's just profoundly therapeutic
to do it for a week or more, up to a month.
- Fantastic.
Yeah, it's really intriguing
because when you think about it,
milk has all the macronutrients.
It has fat, it has protein, it has carbohydrates.
So, you're not really fasting in any sense
'cause you're getting a lot of food
and you're getting a lot of protein and you're getting a lot
of food and you're getting a lot of food and you're getting
a lot of food.
So, it's not really fasting in any sense
'cause you're getting all your macros
and it's got tons of minerals in it.
So, yeah, when I was thinking about it,
I'm like, you know, that makes a really good sense
as far as being a really good mono diet or a cleanse.
- And since stress generally increases inflammation
and that turns on the angiotensin system
that activates the adrenals and albasterone
and that activates the parathyroid glands
and the parathyroids turn off respiratory energy production
as a way of hiding from stress.
The way serotonin is closely involved in albasterone
and parathyroid hormone and serotonin is a way
and it's an important factor on turning on hibernation,
turning off metabolic energy.
And since high calcium intake turns off
the parathyroid gland, it restores energy production
and most people are running around stress to the degree
that their parathyroid and angiotensin
and albasterone serotonin systems are unnecessarily active.
And so it is equivalent to being hypothyroid.
When the stress turns off your metabolism,
it does exactly what hypothyroidism does.
And calcium in sufficient amounts,
like on a pure milk diet,
that's going to very strongly inhibit your parathyroid hormone
meaning that it very strongly increases your metabolic rate,
gets your liver active, providing stabilized glucose
and detoxifying processes
so that any accumulated toxins from your fat
and other tissues will be very efficiently
detoxified and excreted.
So a pure milk diet is very similar
to giving adequate thyroid supplementation
to get the whole energy system
and detoxifying system going again.
- Oh, wow, I'm so glad I asked this question
because like truth be told, lay everything on the table.
I actually did this cleanse, this eight day cleanse.
I've done it twice now with raw goat's milk.
And in eight days, I've had better results with my health
than I've had trying to get past this toxic mold exposure
for the last four years.
So I completely agree with you that this type of approach
is healing on many levels, the liver, the thyroid,
because I've seen it with my own two eyes
and I'm gonna be podcasting about it soon too
with the creator that put together this little milk cleanse
that I specifically did.
So I just wanted your two cents and I'm so glad I asked.
- I have a friend who has a lot of big dogs
and his grandkids have some goats
that they milk and sell the goat milk.
So there's always a generous amount of goat milk
and over the last several years when he discovered
the good effects of milk on himself and friends,
he had a dog that was injured almost fatally in the fight.
And he gave it sugar for immediate recovery,
but then gave it a pure milk diet
and recovered very fast.
So that started him being interested
in the therapeutic properties.
And in one of the fights, a dog's eyeball
was bitten and deflated and disappeared.
So there was just a red socket
and he put that dog on a pure milk diet.
And I guess it was three or four weeks,
he noticed in this empty red socket,
he noticed what looked like a cornea or lens developing.
And over a period of six weeks or two months,
a new eyeball appeared.
- Oh, wow.
- And with a couple of old dogs
who had gone blind from cataracts,
he put them on milk diet
and they recovered from their cataracts.
So the fresh goat milk was apparently responsible
for regenerating, in one case, a whole eyeball
and the other restoring clarity to the lenses.
- Okay, so then the cliche stands,
milk really does do a body good.
So yeah, I think we've heard it here, folks.
You can definitely try a mono diet of milk.
Well, I think we'll jump into the next question.
So this is from SM, it says,
"Could you please ask Dr. Pete how you would know
if you are taking too much thyroid supplement?
For example, I'm taking one whole tablet a day
of Sinoples split into three doses
and half a tablet of Sinomel split into two doses.
My underarm temperature is around 98 degrees Fahrenheit
and resting heart rate around 60 beats per minute.
I generally feel a bit fatigued
wondering if I should up the dose
and how would I know if I'm taking too much?
So I guess the question is,
how do you know if you're taking too much
or too little, Dr. Pete?
- A few times, for example,
if I was taking a two-grain dose of armored thyroid
during the winter, every spring I found
that I started overheating and getting out of breath
if I kept taking that amount.
So I learned that in the spring,
I had to go from two grains down to a half a grain.
And what you are most likely to notice
when you're taking more than enough
is that you're just standing up
and walking across the room, for example,
you'll feel increased warmth and breathe.
You'll be breathing harder
and temporarily get out of breath
just for walking 30 feet or so.
So your heart beats very powerfully
and quickly, usually going 95 or 100 beats per minute
with a very hard, firm pulse,
not a rapid, weak beat.
And you're very easily overheated
and get out of breath,
but you also recover your breath quickly.
- Okay.
Okay, some good symptoms to look for there
than SM.
Okay, so UPCAR at BECOM asks
whether a succinate source of vitamin E
is acceptable to consume.
Now, when I looked into succinate a while back,
that source seems to be really good for cancer prevention.
Yeah, I had just seen some studies on it relating to cancer,
but as far as if it's safe or acceptable to consume,
that's something that I guess
I'll have to look into a bit further.
- The vitamin E should be described
according to its actual composition
as a tocopherol,
which of the isomers of the tocopherol it is.
- Okay, good to know.
Okay, White Lotus asks,
I found three masses in my breast
along with a two centimeter mass in my lymph node
via ultrasound.
And reading further down,
she has a pretty low TSH and T4 within range,
but it seems to be her numbers are getting worse now
and ultrasound showed an enlarged thyroid,
but otherwise normal.
Then she learned about you
and she started taking her temperature
and implementing kind of the way that you describe eating
and her temperature is 97.4 in the morning
and it can get to 98.4 midday.
Her adrenals seem to be involved
'cause her pulse goes from 84 to 94 to 110, 135
when she's stressed
and will sometimes go up and down
within the few seconds that she's taking the pulse.
And ever since COVID, it seems her heart rate is unstable.
She can feel a change when she takes progesterone
and thyroid and she started aspirin,
but it might irritate her stomach sometimes.
Would she still be considered hypothyroid
even though her TSH is so low and T4 is high
and should she continue on the protocol?
Yeah, go ahead.
- What exactly was your TSH number?
Do you have a-
- Yeah, 0.35.
- 0.25?
- 0.35.
- Oh, that's,
it's not inconsistent with hypothyroidism.
So experimenting with the dose is important,
but you don't respond properly to the thyroid supplement
if your body is very saturated with polyunsaturated fats
or if your diet contains polyunsaturated fats
or if you're getting too much phosphate in the diet
from meat or fish or nuts or legumes or grains
will interfere with thyroid function.
Calcium promotes thyroid function.
Vitamin D promotes it by letting you use the calcium.
So you have to look at the whole picture
and protein, sodium, calcium
are all things that increase your metabolic rate
and will help to, if it's just an inflammatory thing
like a plugged milk duct, for example,
the increased metabolic rate should clear it up quickly.
- I'm so glad you brought up the PUFAs
because I think that so many people just think,
okay, I'm going to take a thyroid supplement
and I'm going to take an aspirin
and take some progesterone and all my problems will go away,
but you really do have to dial in the nutrition
and you have to look at the sources
of those polyunsaturated fatty acids that are coming in
'cause they are anti-thyroid,
so they're not going to help you in the end.
So yeah, I'm really glad that you brought that up as well.
She has another question.
What are Ray Pete's thoughts on alcohol, especially champagne?
- In very small quantities,
like a half a teaspoon per day,
it has very powerful anti-inflammatory
and potentially anti-aging effects.
There was a study of brain age pigment or lipophuscan
and they found that vitamin E caused it to be removed
from the living cells, but as a control,
vitamin E had been dissolved in alcohol.
They found that just an alcohol supplement
was enough to remove the age pigment from the brain cells.
And that is probably because of its very powerful
anti-inflammatory effect or antioxidant effect,
but to achieve that, it's just almost microscopic
amount of ethyl alcohol that will serve as an antioxidant.
- I'm just laughing because I'm thinking
of all the people listening to this,
but now their wine glass is gonna have half a teaspoon
of champagne. (laughs)
- Well, champagne is what, maybe 10% alcohol,
very small, somewhere between eight and 10%, I think.
So to have a gram of alcohol,
you could have almost an ounce of champagne.
(laughs)
Well, thankfully I'm not a drinker,
so it doesn't apply to me, but everybody out there,
go get your little teaspoon
and measure out your champagne next time, so yeah.
Okay, gcristy626 asks,
is the vitamin K2 in MCT oil safe?
Some sources list MCT that can be derived from soy.
What's the best way to get K2,
particularly if supplementing with aspirin
to prevent bleeding?
- Many of the products are in MCT oil,
and it depends on the person and the quantity,
but orally ingesting MCT has the possibility
of increasing sensitivity to allergens.
For example, they found that you could create a peanut allergy
by combining a little bit of MCT
with a little bit of a peanut substance.
So it can have a very dangerous effect on the intestine.
So I think it's good to avoid all of the oral supplements
containing MCT on the skin
as far as I know they're safe.
And so when I think I've been,
for example, taking antibiotics
that would reduce the K-producing bacteria in my intestine
and using aspirin,
which will inactivate the substances
that are anti-inflammatory,
to counteract that,
I will either eat an extra amount of liver
or I will open some of the vitamin K capsules
and spread three or four capsules on areas within skin.
- Good idea.
As far as like when you say not taking MCT oils though,
so people really just need to get it
from when they're using coconut oil,
like you recommend,
just getting the natural medium-chain triglycerides
from that, yeah?
- Yeah, many places call MCT a type of coconut oil,
but it's really a totally unnatural thing
that never occurs in nature,
even though the components do,
but they are arranged in a unique, manufactured way
that the arrangement has very powerful biological effects.
- Okay, very good.
Ellie Z asks,
is supplemental calcium carbonate
from undisclosed sources dangerous
due to potential heavy metals
or do benefits outweigh the risk?
- Yeah, it can come from a mine
that contains very harmful amounts of heavy metals.
So eggshells and coral are relatively clean.
Eggshells were the cleanest by analysis,
slightly better than coral calcium carbonate.
- Okay, good to know.
Dave Fit asks,
would like to know about calcium to phosphorus ratio
and maybe magnesium too?
Dr. Pete talks a lot about getting lots of calcium upwards
of 2000 plus milligrams a day
and talks about reducing phosphorus,
but I've never heard where he'd like to see phosphorus intake.
Is there, or there is a decent amount of phosphorus in milk,
so I'm curious what he recommends.
New big fan of Ray Pete, he says.
- Milk has, if you're drinking two or three quarts of milk
a day, you're getting enough calcium.
If your thyroid is functioning,
a low thyroid person loses magnesium.
The cells simply can't retain it very long.
You might eat a huge batch of cooked spinach
and have the symptoms subside for several hours
or a day, but if your thyroid is low,
your cells will lose it and the symptoms will recur.
So you can get along on a surprisingly low level
of magnesium if your thyroid is staying good.
- Okay.
- And milk is a very good source of magnesium
if your thyroid is in good condition.
- Okay, cool.
All right, Dil R.R., D-Y-L-R-R asks,
can Ray please talk about how an adult can grow taller
after growth was stunted due to malnutrition?
Is it possible, Dr. Pete?
- Low thyroid people often don't finish growth
until they're in their 40s, and malnutrition can be
a major cause of a low thyroid function.
I didn't start taking a thyroid supplement,
even though I suspected it for many years,
but I had a high metabolic rate and so I was close to,
I think it was 40 when I started supplementing it.
And when I had moved into that house,
there were kids sharing the house
and everyone marked their height on the door frame.
And after about three or four years
after I had started taking the thyroid supplement,
I was moving out and I checked my height
against the mark made 10 years earlier.
And found that I had grown an inch after the age of 40
because of the thyroid supplement.
- That's so great.
- And I mentioned that to a tall woman
just around the time I, and myself,
and she said exactly the same thing happened to her.
She grew an inch when she was 45.
All things are possible.
Okay, so Laura Dana Nuculi asks,
thank you for these shows, I love them.
And you and Dr. Pete question,
I cannot tolerate progesterone and most things
that are recommended like aspirin makes me really cold.
And progesterone, even a small amount,
even progesty gives me a strong estrogenic reaction,
lack of sleep, sore breasts, long menses, et cetera.
Same with pregnant alone,
that gives me an allergic reaction.
I'm following Ray Pete's work for quite a few years now
and most of the nutritional advice.
I'm on thyroid support and my temps and pulse are okay-ish
and getting better.
Is there anything I can do to tolerate progesterone better?
Main thing I want to do is improve working memory,
especially with the capacity to focus in processing speed.
I'm 43 year old woman with long-term iron deficiency.
Thank you so much.
The iron deficiency diagnosis is usually mistaken
because the iron stores tend to be hidden inside cells.
And the closest you can get with a blood test
is the transfer and saturation percent.
And it should be something like maybe 25 to 30%
is an okay saturation.
But a low red blood cell count can be caused by many things,
a copper deficiency, for example, or too much estrogen.
If you look at female animals versus males,
they always have a lower red cell count.
And that's because estrogen inhibits bone marrow activity.
So often people poison themselves
trying to cure iron deficiency anemia
when it's really a thyroid supplement or trace minerals.
Such as selenium and copper or the B vitamins
to get the red blood cell production up.
The progesterone by opposing that anemia
of producing effective estrogen
and by activating the thyroid gland
will itself improve the anemia
increasing red cell production in women.
And the amount and way that you use progesterone
is very important.
In the oil form, it can be absorbed through the skin,
but it's about 10 times more efficient
if you take it orally.
But since vitamin E is a very viscous oil,
it tends to be at least a disgusting thing
to swallow very much of.
And it's better if you mix it with butter
or other food so that you don't notice
the consistency of it.
Then it will express its progesterone like activity.
And progesterone at every level,
its basic activity is to antagonize estrogen.
So as soon as you feel a progesterone effect,
it is activating your thyroid gland and the large thyroid.
That means that it's accumulating the material
with which to make thyroid hormone,
but it's unable to excrete it
because your body is dominated by estrogen,
which locks the enzymes that break down the thyroglobulin
forming the hormone for secretion.
And so if a person has noticeably enlarged thyroid,
it's better to shrink the thyroid gland
back to the normal size
because occasionally if a person takes enough thyroid,
enough progesterone to block
that anti thyroid effect of estrogen,
the sudden release of the inhibition
and the activating effect of the progesterone
on those enzymes that release hormone
from the thyroid globulin,
that can put you into a hyper thyroid state,
raising your pulse rate to 110 to 120 at rest.
220 at rest until the gland normalizes itself.
I experienced that myself
and I've seen it in two or three other people.
And generally they say that
they never felt better in their life,
but if they happen to go to a doctor,
the doctor would want to destroy their thyroid gland
to cure them, but if they just wait it out
for a couple of months, that corrects itself.
- Okay, another question from White Lotus is,
are there any breads that are okay, like sourdough or rye?
- If it's real sourdough.
- Right.
- A lot of places just add acid to bread,
the actual way to make a nutritious and healthful sourdough
is to soak the flour for 10 or 12 hours.
With or without the yeast, you could add the yeast later.
It doesn't matter because it's the soaking
that turns the starch and protein, the gluten of the flour,
and it has to be living flour, it can't be sterile flour.
So it has to be vital with enzymes that can convert
the gluten and starch into the amino acids
and sugar that allows the yeast to leaven the bread.
And so the bread loses its rubbery, fluffy texture
and tends to be denser and weak, but very good tasting
and very, very non-toxic.
50 years ago when I was interested in making bread,
I had noticed that a single slice of bread
from the grocery store would give me insomnia.
But when I baked my own well-soaked sourdough bread
almost completely free of gluten, it tasted so good.
A couple of times ate a whole loaf of it at bedtime
and slept perfectly.
- I'm sure.
- Very, very digestible stuff.
- Yeah, yeah, but I'm so glad to you.
I agree completely if you can make it yourself
or buy the highest quality fermented loaf of sourdough,
then yeah, I think it's good.
Okay, Julian says, raise thoughts on consistent
nightly Benadryl usage for lowering serotonin
and helping sleep and allergies, thanks.
- As far as I know, there's no specific harm done by it.
It's something that you should consider a temporary crutch
because you can fix the problem of excess histamine
and serotonin.
For example, lowering your estrogen.
Estrogen is the motor behind excess safe histamine
and serotonin activity.
So getting the estrogen under control with thyroid,
progesterone, vitamin D and calcium for example,
will bring on sleep.
- Sometimes I wish I had canned audience applause for you
because some of your answers are just so like,
yay, we need like canned audience applause.
Okay, Joseph asks options for people working through
depersonalization panic disorder.
- The panic part of it is from the falling blood sugar
and excitatory effects of lactic acid.
And the lactic acid is overproduced
because you aren't making enough carbon dioxide
to suppress the lactic acid production.
And so making lactic acid blocks your ability
to produce the sedative carbon dioxide
and to keep your blood sugar up
by the efficient oxidative metabolism.
And so correcting your thyroid.
A first aid can be inhaling carbon dioxide
by re-breathing in the paper bag for a couple of minutes.
- Okay, and NCgirl9FI asks looking forward
to the answer to my question.
I've been following a repeat diet for a year now.
Raw carrot salad, milk, progesterone
and taking a little bit of thyroid.
I'm still getting tension headaches,
especially around menstruation.
My doctor wants to put me on estrogen.
Oh no.
Is there anything else I should try first?
Could this be high serotonin?
Thanks Dr. Pete.
- Yeah, the important thing with progesterone use
when you have a symptom like a menstrual headache or PMS
or essentially any estrogen poisoning effect
is to use the progesterone cyclic plate.
The body produces it for two weeks every month
and then lets up on the production.
If your liver experiences a high level
for more than two weeks,
its enzymes are disposing of the estrogen
as fast as you make it.
And so you're losing the potency of the progesterone
if you don't take a break of at least a week every month.
And you get the most potent effect
if you start it part way through the luteal phase
and use it with the intent of activating your thyroid
and interfering with the estrogen effect.
And you can use thyroid the same way,
especially if you have the active T3 form of thyroid,
such as Cytomel or Sinomel.
And you can use that during the luteal phase
when you have the symptoms to lower the estrogen.
If you use too much of it,
you'll lower the estrogen to the point
where you stop menstruating.
But for example, someone who has been hemorrhaging constantly
couldn't turn off their menstruation.
In just two or three days,
they were able to absolutely turn off the menstruation
by supplementing T3 and that's menorrhagia
or excessive menstruation is a common sign
of hypothyroidism.
And to get your thyroid activity up,
it requires good nutrition,
high ratio of calcium to phosphate,
if possible, a one-to-one ratio is very good,
but many people on a standard diet
are getting five times as much phosphate as calcium.
And that dissipates your energy,
blocks the thyroid function and so on.
- For sure.
Okay, so next one is from Vain R. Prestus.
Ray has previously mentioned that being slightly hyperthyroid
is preferable to being slightly hypo.
What are the physical markers
for a properly adjusted thyroid dosage
for getting that for that slightly hyperthyroid?
- It's really hyper according to the standards
of medical thinking.
It's actually a used thyroid condition
except good thyroid function is almost always considered
as hyperthyroid by the medical and the doctrines
that have developed over the last several years.
And good thyroid function should include a resting pulse
of somewhere in the 85 beats per minute at rest,
just to maintain all of your detoxifying functions,
for example, at a high level.
And your skin should be generally on the moist side.
Your hair should accumulate an oiliness
if you don't wash it for several days.
The softness of the skin depends on adequate oil production
and moisture from the sweat plans.
High estrogen and low thyroid, for example,
knock out the function of most of your sweat plans
leading to dry skin, thin skin,
as well as internal problems
of stress related degenerative symptoms.
And alertness as well as alertness during the daytime
and quick onset of sleep at night.
Many people find that when they're under stress
or traveling or something and can't get to sleep,
five to 10 micrograms of T3
by restoring the brain energy
is creating the relaxed condition
that will allow deep sleep to come on.
It's partly a matter of the temperature,
but partly simply activating energy production.
And the brain is very similar to the muscles
which can't relax fully if you're hypothyroid.
The secretory organs which might either under function
or over function, for example,
excess salivation can happen from hypothyroidism.
So having everything functioning optimally,
having fairly quick transit time
between eating food and excreting it,
it should be on the order of one day
that the average American is three days transit time
on average.
- So glad you mentioned all those.
That'll give people a good symptom picture
to think about as far as like if you wanna make sure
you're where you need to be, so.
XR, oh, go ahead, yeah.
- The intestine should be sterile
and the people in a person with good thyroid activity.
All of the secretions and peristalsis should be so active
that no germ can live between your esophagus
and your end of the small intestine where the colon begins.
All of that should be free of bacteria.
But the average American has a bacterial living
partly up at least in the small intestine.
The lower your thyroid is,
the more infested with bacteria your small intestine becomes.
- Okay, very good.
Okay, XR asks, what are Ray's predictions in the future
regarding COVID and the vaccines?
What will the vaccines cause in his opinion?
- Oh, they cause exactly the same kind of symptom
that the infection does, often worse.
And it's been known for decades
that a viral infection, influenza, for example,
or the other things that cause cold-like symptoms,
that isn't just a respiratory condition,
but it affects your digestive system.
Often the first symptom is in your digestive system.
And that's because of the interference
with your anti-inflammatory processes
of the viral infection, such as influenza or COVID.
And the vaccine, so-called vaccine is,
it's a method of producing the toxic part of the virus,
a spike protein, which knocks out our anti-inflammatory
ACE2 enzyme, which destroys angiotensin
and knocks out inflammation of all sorts.
And in the process, restores metabolic activity
because it has been suppressed by the inflammation.
And so the lingering effects
of the vaccine are going to be just about the same
as the lingering effects of a viral infection
have been a certain percent, maybe only 1%,
maybe several percent, will have lifelong,
recognizable problems resulting from an intense case
of influenza, for example,
or from a bad reaction to the vaccine.
- Okay, last two questions here.
We might kind of tag, we might kind of tag them together
because FAB asks, is sugar as carcinogenic
as we have been told, carcinogenic as we've been told,
leading to cavities and tooth decay?
And then Brandon also wants to know surrounding strategies
to maintain oral health.
It seems some people who transition from a low carb diet
to a higher carb run into cavities.
So having said that, does the pH of the mouth
matter more than we think?
So what about oral health, cavities and such and sugar?
- Yeah, your saliva should be antiseptic
and a very neutral pH, very close to a 7 pH.
And it has antibodies and probably other factors
that help to keep the mouth sterile
and prevent the acid-forming, tooth-destroying bacteria.
But in the absence of that healthy saliva,
which depends on the high energy metabolism and good thyroid,
you can protect your teeth to a great extent
by having some water dissolved baking soda at hand.
And every time you eat something,
swish a little bit of the baking soda solution
in your mouth and swallow it to leave an alkalizing residue
in the mouth.
The story about cancer and sugar
is a horrible misinterpretation of Otto Warburg's work
in the 1920s in which he showed that cancer
can't turn off glycolysis by oxidizing glucose
or other things to carbon dioxide.
Even in the presence of oxygen
and the production of adequate energy,
the cancer keeps turning glucose into lactic acid.
Cancer has a metabolic effect of wasting glucose.
And so the typical cancer is so metabolically inefficient
that inside the tumor, there is extreme lack of oxygen
and glucose both and in order to reduce the oxygen
in orders of an isolated cancer
in a person's leg, for example, and in animal experiments.
They found that if you put an extremely high concentration
of glucose solution into the artery of feeding the tumor,
getting up for the glucose sufficiency created
by the cancer's metabolic inefficiency,
getting enough glucose to the tumor,
the tumor dissolves, kills itself.
So if you think of it in the actual detailed way
that the metabolism is being operated,
you see that glucose is one of the most protective oxygen
along with glucose.
If you can provide it to the tumor in sufficient amounts,
the tumor is going to gain the energy it needs
to heal the wound.
The cancer is an attempt to heal a tissue
without the materials it needs to achieve the healing.
And glucose is one of those materials.
If you don't get enough glucose,
the cancer sends out signals to provide more glucose.
And to do that, if you aren't eating sugar,
the only source of glucose in your body
is to break down protein to turn to glucose.
And so that's why having a tumor tends to produce
wasting away of the muscles and the skin
and the immune system and so on.
And so having enough carbohydrate in your diet
helps to prevent that wasting caused by cancer.
And ideally it can, along with other things
can provide the materials the tumor needs to heal itself.
- That's another reason that we don't need to focus
on low carb diets.
So, well, we made it through all the questions, Dr. Pete,
you were awesome.
And this has been fun as usual.
I love learning from you.
So keep up what you're doing.
And if you guys don't have Dr. Pete's newsletter yet,
it's a great way to support him in the work that he does.
So you can order that mailed order
or emailed order of his newsletter
by reaching out to Ray Pete's newsletter at gmail.com.
And it's wonderful, chock full of wonderful information.
I love every time I get it in my inbox.
So Dr. Pete, thank you for your time today.
- Okay, thank you.
- Hope you have a wonderful evening
and you guys keep those questions coming
and we'll be back with more.
Bye for now.
(upbeat music)
[BLANK_AUDIO]